Add document for ambiguity handling (#37795)
Azure/azure-sdk-for-net: doc/DataPlaneCodeGeneration/Handle-Ambiguity.md

# Handle Ambiguity Between Protocol Method and Convenience Method

## Background

In a DPG library, protocol methods will be generated for a swagger input, and both of protocol methods and convenience methods will be generated for a TypeSpec input. We expect to make convenience method an overload of protocol method, so that users could be very clear they are representing the same operation. For example,

```C#
public virtual async Task<Response<Model>> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId = null, CancellationToken cancellationToken = default) // Convenience method
{
    ...
}

public virtual async Task<Response> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId = null, RequestContext context = null) // Protocol method
{
    ...
}
```
However, this leads to compilation error
```
Error	CS0121	The call is ambiguous between the following methods or properties: 'SomeClass.OperationAsync(string, CancellationToken)' and 'SomeClass.OperationAsync(string, RequestContext)'
```
when calling `OperationAsync("<some string>")`.

## Solution

There are two ways to handle this error:

> 1. Make all the parameters in **protocol methods** to required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Make all the parameters in **protocol methods** to be required.
```

```C#
public virtual async Task<Response<Model>> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId = null, CancellationToken cancellationToken = default) // Convenience method
{
    ...
}

public virtual async Task<Response> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId, RequestContext context) // Protocol method
{
    ...
}
```

> 2. Append `Value` to name of **convenience methods**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Append `Value` to names of **convenience methods**.
```

```C#
public virtual async Task<Response<Model>> OperationValueAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId = null, CancellationToken cancellationToken = default) // Convenience method
{
    ...
}

public virtual async Task<Response> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId = null, RequestContext context = null) // Protocol method
{
    ...
}
```

> The first solution is our preference, so when codegen detects the existing of ambiguity, it chooses the first strategy to resolve the problem.

Reviewer 2: Please help to rephrase this sentence.

Only when protocol method already GAed so that we cannot change it, the codegen will choose the second strategy.

## Scope of ambiguity we handle

Not all the pairs of protocol method and convenience method will have such problem. Below is a case when there is no ambiguity if users are calling normally by passing a `model` or a `content`. (They could not pass in `null` because it will throw error)
```C#
public virtual async Task<Response<Model>> OperationAsync(Model model, CancellationToken cancellationToken = default) // Convenience method
{
    Argument.AssertNotNull(model, nameof(model));
    ...
}

public virtual async Task<Response> OperationAsync(RequestContent content, RequestContext context = null) // Protocol method
{
    Argument.AssertNotNull(content, nameof(content));
    ...
}
```

> Not all the ambiguities could be handled. For example, even we handle the example in Background section like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not all the ambiguities could be resolved. For example, even we handle the example in background as follows
```

```C#
public virtual async Task<Response<Model>> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId = null, CancellationToken cancellationToken = default) // Convenience method
{
    ...
}

public virtual async Task<Response> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId, RequestContext context) // Protocol method
{
    ...
}
```
`OperationAsync("required", "optional", default)` and `OperationAsync("required", "optional", new())` are two examples that lead to compilation error of ambiguity.

> Considering all of these, we only gaurantee that we will not generated code which leads to ambiguous call when:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Considering all of these, we only guarantee that we will not generate code which leads to ambiguous calls when:
```

> 1. The call doesn't have any actual parameters of `null`, `default`, `new()`. For example, we don't care whether `OperationAsync("required", "optional", default)` will lead to ambiguity. Details [here](#special-values-not-taken-into-ambiguity-consideration).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The call doesn't have any actual parameter of `null`, `default`, `new()`. For example, we don't care whether `OperationAsync("required", "optional", default)` will lead to ambiguity. Details [here](#special-values-not-taken-into-ambiguity-consideration).
```

> 2. The call only have set required parameters. For example, we only make sure `OperationAsync("required")` is not an ambiguous call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The call only has required parameters. For example, we can only ensure `OperationAsync("required")` is not an ambiguous call.
```

> See below section of more specific examples and corresponding explanation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See below section for more specific examples and corresponding explanation.
```

## Examples

### Operation without input
Spec:
```
model Model {}
op operation(@path requiredId: string, @path optionalId?: string): Model;
```
What we try to generate:
```C#
public virtual async Task<Response<Model>> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId = null, CancellationToken cancellationToken = default) // Convenience method
{
    ...
}

public virtual async Task<Response> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId = null, RequestContext context = null) // Protocol method
{
    ...
}
```

> It only has one required parameter `requiredId`, so what we gaurantee will not have ambiguity is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It only has one required parameter `requiredId`, so what will not have ambiguity is
```

```C#
OperationAsync("requiredId");
```
Then we find that this call has ambiguity error, so we change our signature by [one of these solutions](#solution).

### Operation with input
Spec:
```
model Model {}
op operation(@body model: Model): Model;
```
```C#
public virtual async Task<Response<Model>> OperationAsync(Model model, CancellationToken cancellationToken = default) // Convenience method
{
    ...
}

public virtual async Task<Response> OperationAsync(RequestContent content, RequestContext context = null) // Protocol method
{
    ...
}
```

> No matter the input model is required or optional in spec, it is a required parameter in the signature. So we care about:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whether the input model is required or optional in spec, it is a required parameter in the signature. So we care about:
```

# Handle Ambiguity Between Protocol Method and Convenience Method

> ## Background

Reviewer 3: instead of `Background`, i think this is more of a `Problem` corresponding to the `Solution` we have below.

## Solutions

There are two ways to handle this error:

1. Make all the parameters in **protocol methods** required.
```C#
public virtual async Task<Response<Model>> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId = null, CancellationToken cancellationToken = default) // Convenience method
{
    ...
}

public virtual async Task<Response> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId, RequestContext context) // Protocol method
{
    ...
}
```
2. Append `Value` to the name of the **convenience method**.
```C#
public virtual async Task<Response<Model>> OperationValueAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId = null, CancellationToken cancellationToken = default) // Convenience method
{
    ...
}

public virtual async Task<Response> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId = null, RequestContext context = null) // Protocol method
{
    ...
}
```

Our strategy is:
- If the protocol method hasn’t been GAed, the first solution is taken if there exists an ambiguous call.
- If the protocol method is already GAed, the second solution is taken because we cannot change protocol method anymore.

> ## Scope of ambiguity we handle

Reviewer 3: this standalone section of "edge cases" is making the following content a bit off-topic.
Could we make it a note of the section of `Solution`?

> Not all the pairs of protocol method and convenience method will have such problem. Below is a case when there is no ambiguity if users are calling normally by passing a `model` or a `content`. (They could not pass in `null` because it will throw error)

Reviewer 3: I think here we should summarize this section in case people would fixate on edge cases and ignoring the problem we are trying to solve such as:
It is impossible that the ambiguities could always be fixed when the two methods are overloads of each other, because of the existence of `default`. We could always use the `default` keyword which is acceptable by any parameter to construct a scenario that the compiler would complain about ambiguities of invocation. Therefore our goal is not solving all cases of the ambiguities, for the following cases, we will allow them to have ambiguities: ...

Reviewer 3: And I see we have two principals in this section, we should emphasize them first and then have examples.

```C#
public virtual async Task<Response<Model>> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId = null, CancellationToken cancellationToken = default) // Convenience method
{
    ...
}

public virtual async Task<Response> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId, RequestContext context) // Protocol method
{
    ...
}
```
`OperationAsync("required", "optional", default)` and `OperationAsync("required", "optional", new())` are two examples that still lead to compilation error of ambiguity.

Considering all of these, we only guarantee that we will not generate code which leads to ambiguous call when:
1. The call doesn't have any actual parameter of `null`, `default`, `new()`. For example, we don't care whether `OperationAsync("required", "optional", default)` will lead to ambiguity. Details [here](#special-values-not-taken-into-ambiguity-consideration).
2. The call only has its required parameters passed in. For example, we can only ensure `OperationAsync("required")` is not an ambiguous call.

See below section for more specific examples and corresponding explanation.

## Examples

> ### Operation without input

Reviewer 3: the word input is quite ambiguous. `requiredId` is also an input in the following example.
Should it be `Operations without request body`?

{
    ...
}

public virtual async Task<Response> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId = null, RequestContext context = null) // Protocol method
{
    ...
}
```
It only has one required parameter `requiredId`, so the call that we guarantee will not have ambiguity is
```C#
OperationAsync("requiredId");
```
Then we find that this call has ambiguity error, so we have to change our signature by choosing from [one of these solutions](#solution).

### Operation with input
Spec:
```
model Model {}
op operation(@body model: Model): Model;
```
```C#
public virtual async Task<Response<Model>> OperationAsync(Model model, CancellationToken cancellationToken = default) // Convenience method
{
    ...
}

public virtual async Task<Response> OperationAsync(RequestContent content, RequestContext context = null) // Protocol method
{
    ...
}
```
No matter if the input model is required or optional in spec, it is a required parameter in the signature. So, what we care about are:
```C#
OperationAsync(new Model());
OperationAsync(new RequestContent());
```
Then we find out these calls are fine, so just keep these signatures.

> ### Operation without both input and output

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Operation without both input or output
```

Spec:
```
op operation(@path requiredId: string, @path optionalId?: string): void;
```
What we try to generate:
```C#
public virtual async Task<Response> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId = null, RequestContext context = null) // Protocol method
{
    ...
}
```
We don't generate convenience method for this case (see [this](#convenience-method-not-always-generated) to see why), so there will be no ambiguity.

> ### Operation with spread scenario

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Operation with spread parameters
```

Spec:
```
alias OperationAlias = {
  requiredId: string;
  optionalId?: string;
};
op operation(...OperationAlias): void;
```
What we try to generate:
```C#
public virtual async Task<Response> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId = null, CancellationToken cancellationToken = default) // Convenience method
{
    ...
}
public virtual async Task<Response> OperationAsync(RequestContent content, RequestContext context = null) // Protocol method
{
    ...
}
```

> The convenience method has a required parameter `requiredId` and protocol method has a required method `content`, so what we guarantee will not have ambiguity are

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The convenience method has a required parameter `requiredId` and protocol method has a required parameter `content`, therefore we guarantee the following invocations will not have ambiguities:
```

```C#
OperationAsync("requiredId");
OperationAsync(new RequestContent());
```
Then we find these calls are fine, so just keep these signatures.

## Appendix

> ### Convenience method not always generated

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Convenience methods are not always generated
```

> There is one [situation](#operation-without-both-input-and-output) we don't generate convenience method. Think about what would be like if we generate the convenience method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is one [situation](#operation-without-both-input-and-output) we don't generate convenience method, because if we did, the convenience method would have almost exact the same parameter list as the protocol method:
```

```C#
public virtual async Task<Response> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId = null, CancellationToken cancellationToken = default) // Convenience method
{
    ...
    RequestContext context = FromCancellationToken(cancellationToken);
    OperationAsync(requiredId, optionalId, context);
    ...
}
public virtual async Task<Response> OperationAsync(string requiredId, string optionalId = null, RequestContext context = null) // Protocol method
{
    ...
}
```

> The convenience method is just a wrapper and doesn't have any value. So, we just skip generating it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The convenience method is just a wrapper therefore it is not generated.
```
